Series: We'll learn about the two most important series-AP and GP.
Equations: We'll look at quadratic formula and how to use it to solve quadratic equations.
Numbers: Prime numbers and use of sieve of Erastothenes.
Multiples and Factors: What is LCM? How is GCD related to LCM? Other important terms like factors, multiples. 
	Theorems like Euclid's algorithms for GCD, it's extended version.
Combinatorics: What is factorial? We'll learn about permutations and combinations.
Modular Arithmetic: Various properties of modular arithmetic


Programs:
Finding number of Digits in a Number 
  	1)Iterative solotion:time complexity of the solution is O(digitsCount).
  	2)Recrsive soltion
  	3)number of digits in N = k= floor(log10(N) + 1): time complexity of the solution is O(1)
Arithmetic and Geometric Progressions 
Arithmetic Progression
	A sequence of numbers is said to be in an Arithmetic progression 
	if the difference between any two consecutive terms is always the same. 
	For example, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 is an AP because difference between any two consecutive terms 
	in the series (common difference) is same (4 - 2 = 6 - 4 = 8 - 6 = 10 - 8 = 2).
Facts about Arithmetic Progression :

The behavior of the arithmetic progression depends on the common difference d. 
	If the common difference is:positive, then the members (terms) will grow towards positive infinity or negative, 
	then the members (terms) will grow towards negative infinity.
nth term of an AP = a + (n-1)*d.
Arithmetic Mean = Sum of all terms in the AP / Number of terms in the AP.
Sum of ‘n’ terms of an AP =  n/2 (first term + last term) = 0.5 n [ 2a + (n-1) d ].

Geometric Progression
A sequence of numbers is said to be in a Geometric progression if the ratio of any two consecutive terms is always same. 
Facts about Geometric Progression :
	The behaviour of a geometric sequence depends on the value of the common ratio. If the common ratio is:
		Positive, the terms will all be the same sign as the initial term.
		Negative, the terms will alternate between positive and negative.
		Greater than 1, there will be exponential growth towards positive or negative infinity (depending on the sign of the initial term).
		1, the progression is a constant sequence.
		Between -1 and 1 but not zero, there will be exponential decay towards zero.
		-1, the progression is an alternating sequence.
		Less than -1, for the absolute values there is exponential growth towards (unsigned) infinity, due to the alternating sign.
If ‘a’ is the first term and ‘r’ is the common ratio:
nth term of a GP = a*rn-1.
Geometric Mean = nth root of product of n terms in the GP.
Sum of ‘n’ terms of a GP (r < 1) = [a (1 – rn)] / [1 – r].
Sum of ‘n’ terms of a GP (r > 1) = [a (rn – 1)] / [r – 1].
Sum of infinite terms of a GP (r < 1) = (a) / (1 – r).


Quadratic Equations 
A quadratic equation is a second-order polynomial equation of a variable say x. The general form of a quadratic equation is given as:
a*x2 + b*x + c = 0
Where a,b and c are real known values and,
a can't be zero.

roots = (-b ± √(b2 - 4ac))/2a

If b2 < 4ac, then roots are complex
(not real).
For example roots of x2 + x + 1, roots are
-0.5 + i1.73205 and -0.5 - i1.73205

If b2 = 4ac, then roots are real 
and both roots are same.
For example, roots of x2 - 2x + 1 are 1 and 1

If b2 > 4ac, then roots are real 
and different.
For example, roots of x2 - 7x - 12 are 3 and 4


Mean and Median 
Mean is defined as average of a given set of data.
Facts about Mean :
	The mean (or average) is the most popular and well known measure of central tendency.
	It can be used with both discrete and continuous data, although its use is most often with continuous data.
	There are other types of means. Geometric mean, Harmonic mean and Arithmetic mean.
	Mean is the only measure of central tendency where the sum of the deviations of each value from the mean is always zero.
Median
Median is the middle value of a set of data. To determine the median value in a sequence of numbers, the numbers must first be arranged in an ascending order.
If the count of numbers in the sequence is ODD, the median value is the number that is in the middle, with the same amount of numbers below and above.
If the count of numbers in the sequence is EVEN, the median is the average of the two middle values.
Formula for finding Median :
If the count of numbers is odd: After sorting the sequence,
Median = {(N+1)/2}th value.
If the count of numbers is even: After sorting the sequence,
Median  =  Average of (N/2)th and {(N/2) + 1}th value.
Facts about Median :
Median is an important measure (compared to mean) for distorted data, because median is not so easily distorted. For example, median of {1, 2, 2, 5, 100) is 2 and mean is 22.
If the user adds a constant to every value, the mean and median increases by the same constant.
If the user multiplies every value by a constant, the mean and the median will also be multiplied by that constant. 
 


Prime Numbers
A prime number is a whole number greater than 1, which is only divisible by 1 and itself. 
First few prime numbers are : 2 3 5 7 11 13 17 19 23 ........

Naive Method to Check if a number is Prime: 
Since a number is prime only if it is divisible by 1 and the number itself, 
the naive method to check for primality of a number would be to iterate from 1 to N and check 
if there aren't any factors of N except and 1 and N itself.
Algorithm:
If, N is less than 2. It is not prime, return False.
Else:
Iterate from 2 to N-1 and check if any of the numbers between 2 and N-1 (both inclusive) divides N or not. If yes, then N is not prime, return False.
Otherwise, return True.
Analysis of the above algorithm: 
Since we are traversing linearly from 2 to N-1, the time complexity of the above algorithm will be linear O(N). 


Sieve of Eratosthenes
Using Sieve of Eratosthenes is the most efficient way of generating prime numbers upto a given number N.

Following is the algorithm to find all the prime numbers less than or equal to a given integer n by Eratosthenes' method:
Create a list of consecutive integers from 2 to n: (2, 3, 4, ..., n).
Initially, let p equal 2, the first prime number.
Starting from p^2, count up in increments of p and mark each of these numbers greater than or equal to p2 itself in the list. 
These numbers will be p(p+1), p(p+2), p(p+3), etc..
Find the first number greater than p in the list that is not marked. If there was no such number, stop. 
Otherwise, let p now equal this number (which is the next prime), and repeat from step 3.

Explanation with Example: 
Let us take an example when n = 50. So we need to print all print numbers smaller than or equal to 50.
We create a list of all numbers from 2 to 50.
According to the algorithm we will mark all the numbers which are divisible by 2 and are greater than or equal to the square of it.
Now we move to our next unmarked number 3 and mark all the numbers which are multiples of 3 and are greater than or equal to the square of it.
We move to our next unmarked number 5 and mark all multiples of 5 and are greater than or equal to the square of it.
We continue this process and our final table will look like below:
So the prime numbers are the unmarked ones: 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23, 29, 31, 37, 41, 43, 47.








  LCM and HCF 
  Factorials 
  Permutation and Combinations Basics 
  Modular Arithmetic 
